# Critiques

## Limitations of MMT

So there are some important paradigms that MMT draws on. Part of the problem is that this is advanced undergraduate level of economics and so a lot of casual observers have a hard time understanding credit creation and how fiscal-monetary independence works. One of the mainreasons that people are confused and buy into MMT, I believe, is because the process of"money creation" is confusing, complicated, and it seems like a "free lunch" even though it'sreally not. The central bank doesn't actually print money, they don't even control the moneysupply, they are mostly there to provide liquidity to banks meaning they create credit but not"literal money." In contrast the federal government borrows money by auctioning bonds severaltimes a week in a public-facing auction. This public-facing auction is really important because itallows the market to value the US debt. The fed even has to buy bonds at the same auction,there is no special arrangement between the treasury and the central bank. That's critical thatthe debt gets priced by the market. If the fed bought directly from the treasury there's noguarantee the debt would be valued properly by the market. I know I'm a bit off-subject now butthe way the federal government raises funds in actuality is little-known, little-understood, andactually really interesting and institutionally meaningful, in my opinion.

With regard to MMT itself the most important violation of the MMT principles is the idea inmodern macroeconomics that individuals take their expectations of future outcomes intoaccount. This is super important in countries which experience hyperinflation: when thegovernment abuses the monetary system, i.e. using the central bank to finance its activities,people lose faith in the monetary system and inflation may spiral out of control leading to highlyvolatile and negative situations. Once people have lost faith in your currency and central bank itis very difficult to recover although Brazil has managed to pull itself out of this nosedive in a veryinteresting case study.

Bob Lucas from Chicago developed in part these rational expectations ideas and they are acentral tenet in modern macroeconomics. Lucas argued that consumers are intelligentstrategists not stupid atomistic actors. People think strategically and in order to haveeconomically meaningful models we have to account for strategic human behavior at themicroeconomic scale not just the macroeconomic one. He came up with this theory onobserving a correlation between high inflation and high unemployment which shattered themacroeconomists ideas about a Philips curve (the Philips curve represents the idea of aninflation-unemployment tradeoff). This theory is called the rational expectations hypothesis:consumers expect future inflation to be high and that affects current outcomes and theirsubsequent behaviors such as holding dollars instead of brazilian or venezuelan currencies.Remember if you get paid in a currency whose value is rapidly losing its value you'd not be ahappy camper. For these reasons, no macroeconomists or central bankers of merit would scoffat central bank independence: signalling to consumers that the central bank will always actagainst high or rising inflation is really important to creating a positive climate for investments.